From WatchMojo.com to preshows in movie theaters
to… well, TopTenz, everyone wants to provide
small novelty pieces of information about
beloved movies.
Unfortunately, the high demand means that
the product has gotten a bit diluted over
time.
Misunderstandings or even outright lies now
permeate the pop culture landscape.
We’re inclined to believe a lot of them
if for no other reason than the reputation
that people have in show business for being
weird, or for crazy things to happen when
millions of dollars are spent on make believe.
Here at TopTenz there’s too much respect
for the truth to let that stand.
Well, at least we want to help our readers
put some smug people who think they’re the
smartest people in the world because they
know some piece of trivia in their place.
10.
Alien’s Gender Flip
Since Ellen Ripley’s status as the main
character (and sole survivor, not counting
the cat) of the Alien franchise was a surprise
in the original film of the series, the part
being played by Sigourney Weaver instead of,
say, her then-more famous male co-star Tom
Skerritt made it a subject of a lot of discussion
from 1979 onwards.
One of the claims that popped up over the
years was that the character was originally
intended to be male.
This seems to be a carryover from the genderflipped
character Ruth Leavitt in the slightly less
famous 1971 science fiction classic The Andromeda
Strain.
None other than screenwriter Dan O’Bannon
refuted the story.
He clarified that, intentionally, none of
the characters were gender specific in his
script so that the casting director could
take care of that.
He had even included notes about this decision
on the last page of his original screenplay.
We’ll leave it up to the reader to decide
what if anything this says about gender roles
in fiction.
9.
Johnny Depp/Jackie Earle Haley
It’s a classic story of an audition with
a comical twist: Someone who doesn’t even
intend to be an actor is just going along
with a friend to audition for a job.
Turns out the casting director prefers the
friend who wasn’t intending to act, and
that person goes on to be a big star.
Something very similar to that happened to
Bob Hoskins, for example.
The single most famous example of this would
likely be in 1983, when Jackie Earle Haley
brought Johnny Depp along with him for a role
in A Nightmare on Elm Street and ended up
launching his friend’s career.
Then for a fun coincidence, Jackie Earle Haley
was cast as Freddy Krueger for the 2010 remake.
Except… no.
Haley clarified in an interview in Esquire
that all this talk of him and Depp at the
audition was just a rumor.
He doesn’t even know what the origin of
the rumor could have been, just that him not
bringing Depp there was crystal clear.
8.
Daniel Day Lewis’s Insane Method Acting
Daniel Day-Lewis is as much famous for his
extreme method acting as he is for winning
three Academy Awards for Best Actor.
For example, playing the primarily paralyzed
Christy Brown in My Left Foot involved him
staying in a wheelchair for the duration of
the shoot.
He supposedly insists on only being referred
to by his character’s name.
It’s all designed to instill the belief
that he spends all day trying to think of
himself as the character in some maniacal
worship of the acting profession.
On the podcast I Was There Too, Paul F. Tompkins
(who worked with him on There Will Be Blood)
clarified that Lewis wasn’t so intensely
in character at all.
Between takes he would discuss the characters
as if they were characters, he wouldn’t
insist at all on being referred to by his
character’s name, and he was fine with dropping
the accent once the shoot was done for the
day.
Indeed, as Tompkins opines, it would be an
indication that Lewis isn’t a good actor
if he makes others uncomfortable with such
unreasonable demands, since part of the nature
of being a good actor is to pay attention
to the needs of your collaborators.
7.
Tricking Alan Rickman
No, this isn’t an assertion that it’s
untrue that Alan Rickman was ever tricked.
This is referring to a story that, in order
to get a better reaction out of Hans Gruber
for the shot when he is dropped off Nakatomi
Plaza in Die Hard, supposedly the director
told him that he would be dropped on the count
of three.
However, to get a genuinely shocked reaction
before Rickman had properly braced himself,
though, he was dropped on the count of one.
Sorry to ruin everyone’s fun, but Rickman
was asked about this very thing during a Q&A
event.
He unambiguously didn’t remember it happening,
which – considering how vividly he remembered
the director saying “we’re going to drop
the actor” – means that would have been
an aspect that would have stuck in his memory.
Considering he remembered the fall being higher
than the generally reported (40 feet instead
of 25) he clearly wasn’t in the mood to
downplay anything.
6.
Al Capone’s Tailor
Bringing it back to the subject of method
acting, we all know perhaps the second biggest
method actor in the world was Robert DeNiro
for years and years, starting with becoming
a real cab driver for weeks to prepare to
play Travis Bickle in 1974’s Taxi Driver.
By the time 1987 rolled around, for The Untouchables
the news went around that DeNiro was supposedly
personally tracking down Al Capone’s tailor
so that the pajamas he wore (and even his
underwear) matched the crime lord’s.
As was pointed out by others well after this
misconception spread, given that there was
a 56-year gap between Capone’s incarceration
and the production of The Untouchables, Capone’s
tailor was very unlikely to be in the right
shape to work.
For one thing, Capone’s tailor was actually
Louis Dinato, an associate of Capone’s whose
main noteworthy aspect was being repeatedly
questioned by the police even after Capone
was imprisoned (to no avail), as if he were
some sort of interrogation punching bag.
The person who actually did the costume work
for DeNiro was Rich Bruno, and given that
he was only 52 when The Untouchables was made,
it would have been quite a trick for the costumer
to be tailoring for Al Capone.
5.
Spider-Man’s 156 Takes
This one has been a favorite of trivia sites
for years: Somehow Sam Raimi’s 2002 film
Spider-Man had enough time in the production
schedule to devote hours and hours (if not
days) to shoot 156 takes of Tobey Maguire
catching a tray full of food.
Now granted, in 2002 CGI affordable enough
for a throwaway gag wasn’t quite up to scratch,
so there’s plenty of reason to do it mechanically
instead of with computers.
But Maguire didn’t do it alone and the “156
takes” claim is certainly a joke (evidenced
by the fact that in its source, a commentary
track, the commenter gets a laugh from it).
It explicitly was a combination of using a
“mechanical rig” to drop the food and
gluing the tray to Maguire’s hand, and using
force-absorbing gel on the bottom of said
food.
In fact, if you go frame-by-frame, you can
see a white substance stuck to the bottom
of the apple.
That at least confirms it wasn’t CGI, since
why would a CG artist put that on there?
Still, it definitely puts this back in the
“SFX” category.
4.
Werner Herzog’s Shoe Bet
Errol Morris and Werner Herzog are two of
the most interesting documentary filmmakers
working today, and their film careers were
connected in a rather befuddling way.
Errol Morris began his career in 1978 with
the cult documentary Gates of Heaven (particularly
beloved by Roger Ebert) at a time when he
had little funding and getting distribution
for the film would have been extremely difficult.
Herzog came up with a bizarre bet to motivate
his friend: If the movie were completed, Herzog
would eat his shoe at the premiere.
It was enough of an event that a short film
was made of the preparation of the meal.
Then Morris came along during a Q&A session
at the Lincoln Center and revealed that they
actually didn’t have a wager – it was
just something that Herzog had made up as
an excuse to eat a shoe.
Not wanting to be comedically upstaged, while
telling the truth about this, Morris said
he would joke for years that the bet had actually
stipulated Herzog’s foot.
3.
The Dark Knight’s Remote Futzing
Heath Ledger’s performance as the Joker
in this 2008 blockbuster was so compelling
that much of his manic behavior felt completely
natural, leaving audiences open to the notion
that even the biggest parts were improvised.
A scene where the Joker claps in jail is an
example.
But the best known example is the scene where
the Joker is blowing up Gotham General Hospital,
but stops when there seems to be a problem
with the detonation.
In what was alleged to be improv, Ledger messes
with the remote, and then the explosion resumes,
leaving him to scramble onto the bus.
As director Christopher Nolan explains in
a behind the scenes feature included on The
Dark Knight blu-ray, the sudden stop in the
explosion and the Joker’s pause was actually
planned in advance.
In fact, Warner Brothers provided a CGI mockup
of how the scene would be staged as evidence.
That’s much further than most studios go
in debunking a piece of trivia.
2.
Citizen Kane’s Non-Plot Hole
Since this 1941 film has for decades been
known as arguably the best ever made, it was
a delight for film buffs and critics alike
to claim that the story has a gigantic plot
hole right in the middle of it.
The impetus for the story is that the titular
Kane’s last word was “Rosebud” and it
was supposed to be said to an empty room.
Which begs the question of how anyone heard
what his final word was if he was alone.
There was a story circulated that this was
pointed out to auteur Orson Welles by a member
of the crew, and Welles responded some variation
on “don’t you ever tell anyone this.”
The problem with the plausibility of that
little story is that it’s not consistent
with the content of the movie.
While the opening scene has been watched by
cinefiles and parodied many times by shows
such as The Simpsons, the scene’s person
who heard the words doesn’t appear until
much later.
Very near the end, the reporter that’s been
spending the movie trying to learn from Kane’s
intimates what Rosebud could mean has a brief
chat with the butler Raymond, who explicitly
says he’s the one who heard it.
Raymond’s other main contribution to the
movie is telling the reporter about the famous
scene where Kane wrecks his room until he
sees a snow globe and says Rosebud the first
time.
So if someone had asked Orson Welles about
who heard the words, Welles would just have
said Raymond instead of acting as if his entire
movie were in jeopardy.
1.
Being John Malkovich’s Beer Can
A lot of this trivia took a concerted effort
to debunk or a celebrity to wanted to set
the record straight.
In this case, the thing that disproved it
was completely unintentional.
Indeed, the performer in question might not
even have ever heard of the false story.
In Being John Malkovich, there’s a scene
where the titular actor is walking by a road
while he’s in a rut.
An extra in a passing vehicle yelled “Hey
Malkovich, think fast!” and threw a beer
can at his head.
Supposedly the scene was completely unscripted
and instead of being rebuked for potentially
ruining a take, the actor got a raise (some
versions say he got a Screen Actors Guild
card) because the line of dialogue was used.
The truth didn’t come out until Malkovich
was doing a question and answer session known
as a “AMA” (Ask Me Anything) on the popular
website Reddit.
One of his fans asked about that particular
scene without mentioning it was supposedly
completely spontaneous.
The actor said that he was especially fond
of that scene, and had been looking forward
to it… as soon as he read it in the script.
In fact, director Spike Jonze wasn’t even
sure if any of the actors would be able to
hit Malkovich in an acceptably low number
of takes.
In hindsight, it would have been a pretty
bad idea to actively encourage extras to do
things that might harm actors and ruin takes,
so everyone should have found the story dubious
even before Malkovich accidentally corrected
them.